# Capacitors
---
Compared to resistors, capacitors behave much less intuitively.  Capacitors are simple components in a circuit that add, you guessed it, capacitance.  So what are they and what is capacitance anyway? Physically, capacitors are two conductors separated by an insulator.  In the classic example there are two plates parallel each other and air is the insulator between them.
Manufactured capacitors come in all shapes and sizes. Non manufactured capacitors look like clouds, transmission lines, wires bundled together in a cable or different layers on a printed circuit board (PCB) but the important part is that there is no path for electrons to travel between the plates.  "Wait... what?  If electrons don't travel around a circuit then... well that's hardly a circuit at all... right?" The answer is: sort of?
 
For a simple DC circuit, the capacitor looks very much like an open circuit.  If there is no charge built up on the capacitor and a switch is thrown between it and the voltage source there is a little bit of current flow but only so much as will saturate one of the plates inside the capacitor (which is a very small amount even for relatively large capacitors). We might think of a capacitor as a small reservoir attached to our drain from our water examples in the Basic Resistors post. The big pool lets out a small amount of water to fill the smaller volume but after a short time the reservoir fills up and there is no more water flowing (current).

What makes a capacitor unique is exactly this kind of charge build up.  One might even say that they have some capacity to hold electrons (capacitance). With all of the negative charge collected on one of the plates a potential difference develops across the capacitor. Since one of the plates is hoarding all of our electrons the other plate becomes positively charged in relation.  The interesting thing that happens with a voltage and no path for the electrons to take is that something called an electric field develops between the two oppositely charged plates.
Unfortunately our water similes fall apart here.  It's harder to conceptualize an electric field than draining pools.  That doesn't mean we can't draw on the power of association to develop an intuitive understanding of electric fields, however.  Take static electricity and magnets, for instance. When you rub a balloon in your hair you are displacing electrons from your body onto the balloon, if you rub the balloon on your head there will be a net positive charge in your hair and  a net negative charge on the balloon.  Your hair is light enough that the two fields acting on it make it  1) stand on end and 2) 'reach' for the balloon.  

What happens when you try to push two magnets of the same polarity together?  They resist with a magnetic force; the same thing happens when the strands of your hair have collected a similar charge.  The hair fibers push away from each other the way a magnet might.  What happens when you try to hold two magnets of opposite polarity apart?  They pull towards each other and in much the same way your positively charged hair fibers will be pulled towards the negatively charged balloon.  
This interaction is similar to what you might find on the surface of a capacitors plates.  All of the electrons will gather on one plate and space themselves out as evenly as possible continuing to do so until there is no more room for electrons. It is worth noting at this point that how far away the electrons are from one another is related to how much potential exists across the capacitor; the higher the voltage the closer the electrons, this will be important later when we talk about how capacitors can fail.
So now we have one plate that is negatively charged in relation to the other plate which develops a 'positive charge' as a result.  So if we were able to fit little positively charged hair fibers between the capacitor plates they would be pushed from the positive plate, pulled from the negative plate and the fiber would ultimately move towards the negatively charged plate; eventually sticking to that side.
Now what happens if you wander around with wool socks on rubbing your feet against the carpet and you run and touch grandma? ZAAP! Not only were you a very bad grandchild, but you were also a poorly designed capacitor.  There is a point to where the electric field between two dissimilarly charged materials becomes too great for the insulator between them.  In the case of air this is in the lower range of tens of thousands of Volts which might seem like a lot considering most power outlets in the US are on the order of 110 Volts.  But the reason you didn't explode your dear old gran is that the potential was high enough to ionize the air between your finger and her ear, but there wasn't enough charge to release any real power.
Electric power is usually measured in Watts.  Watts are measured as Volts times Amperes per second, so even very high voltage AND very high current discharges over VERY short time frames can end up being relatively low-power. Well, what about when there is a LOT of current and a LOT of Voltage behind a static discharge?

Lightning! That's right!  There is a lot of movement up in the clouds and that movement causes a lot of charge build up ( like when you rub your wool socks on the ground ).  When there is a sufficient enough charge in the clouds coupled with a large opposite charge on the ground, the air that would normally act as an insulator breaks down and creates a path for all the electrons to quickly equalize the charge between the ground and their cloud.  This creates an ionized channel of gas in the air, which is a fancy way of saying 'makes a conductive path through the air,' allowing current to flow from the cloud to the ground (or another cloud) which generates a lot of light, heat, and sound that we know as lightning and thunder.
Capacitors can fail in the same way that lightning develops.  Like our cloud and ground system many capacitors use air as an insulator but many of them also use other materials that become polarized when placed in an electric field like the one created by our capacitors. Such materials are called dielectrics.  When the potential across the dielectric reaches a critical point the material begins to breakdown, a channel of electrons is forced through it, and the circuit is shorted briefly or permanently depending on the material.

In summary capacitors as components are designed to separate charge between two conductors.  Capacitance can build up between two conducting objects by means of interacting with other charged objects and sometimes the potential between them can cause a breakdown that allows current to suddenly flow, somewhat fantastically in the case of lightning. Capacitors in DC circuits are typically uninteresting or provide a way to block the DC voltage altogether ("Hey look, an open circuit!").  Capacitors have a lot of use in AC circuits where they can be used to filter different frequencies
