# Inductors
Inductors are really interesting components.  They allow us to do a lot of real work with electricity.  "That's neat," I hear you say "but what in the world is an inductor?"  Right.  Well lets start at the beginning shall we?  An inductor is quite simply a conductor formed into a loop, a partial loop or many loops where, generally, there is a greater inductance as you add loops.


There are some interesting physics that make running current through a loop useful. The relationship between electricity and magnetism is strong enough that we can use electricity to manipulate magnetic fields and conversely, generate electric current with magnetic materials. In fact, electricity and magnetism are so closely related that there is an entire field of study, electromagnetism, that you can go get a PhD in once you finish reading this blog.
To get an understanding of how inductors function all you need is your right hand... and honestly if you can just imagine a hand that's good enough. Why do we need hands to talk about inductors?  Well because there are some easy to remember rules about current flow and magnetic fields; namely the "right hand rule." If you have a straight piece of wire and pass a current through it a magnetic field is generated in concentric circles around the wire.  If we can imagine the current traveling in the direction of our thumb, the direction of the magnetic force generated is in the direction of our fingers if we can imagine them wrapping around a broom handle. Voila! The right hand rule.


So how does all this make sense in a loop?  We can imagine a wire wrapped in several loops like a spring or a slinky the current is now going around the coil.  You'll notice that if you rotate your right thumb around the path current would take through the wire the direction of the magnetic field (your finger tips) does not change.  In fact the magnetic fields are additive which is why we get more inductance with more loops.  Along the inside of the coil there is a relatively strong magnetic field generated when current is flowing.  The magnetic field exits from one end of the coil, arcs back around and enters through the other side of the coil.


You may remember from the Capacitor Basics post that capacitors store energy in electric fields.  Inductors, by comparison, store energy in magnetic fields.  The current and voltage relationship for an inductor are the inverse from the same relationship in a capacitor.  Namely if a DC voltage is suddenly applied capacitors instantly see the current provided and develop a voltage as the current reduces.  Inductors on the other hand instantly see the voltage across them and slowly develop a current as the voltage decreases.


So what can we do with inductors? Well electromagnets are the strongest magnets on the planet and are created with large inductive coils. Most electric motors are made with inductive coils.  Transformers, used to reduce the high voltage power in transmission lines to usable voltages in your home, are made from inductors.  Almost all high output power plants are some kind of magnetic coil system that is ultimately driven by steam.  That's right, even some nuclear power plants boil water to create steam to drive giant turbines that rotate a magnetic shaft inside an inductive coil.  The constantly changing magnetic polarity on the shaft induces a current in the coil.  That power is then transported via transmission line all over the country.
On a smaller scale we can use inductors in circuits to create signal filters, matched impedance networks, and as sensors. We'll explore some applications of inductors in greater detail in later posts. In the meantime you can now thank inductors for the fact that your car magically recharges itself as you drive, you don't have to use appliances that run on 115,000 Volts, and that your calls to Australia come in relatively clear.
