# Resistors
---
Resistors are arguably the most basic component of electronic circuits.  Despite their relative simplicity, resistors and their resistance will be a factor in every single electronic circuit. "But what ~is~ a resistor?" You might be asking.  Well in short: a resistor is, as it's name implies, something that resists the flow of electrons.  The resistance of a given material is the physical property that determines how well electrons can move through it.  Copper wires, for instance, allow electrons to travel very freely through them which is why they are used to make connections between components in a circuit. Rubber, on the other hand, does not permit electrons to travel as freely through it and consequentially has very high resistance. Humans are a kind of resistor and dogs and cuttlefish too!  This is why we want to avoid completing circuits with any part of our body (no forks in the outlets, please).

As I'm sure you came here for more comparisons of resistance with water in pipes… well, yea it's kind of like that.  Imagine a pool of water with a drain at the bottom made of a small pipe.  Only so much water can fit through the pipe at any one time, the height of water in the pool is called the "head" and the amount of force exerted on the drain is given by D * H * g or the density of water (~1000kg/m^3) by the height of the water above the drain (in meters) by the gravitational constant (~9.8ms^2).  As the height of the waterline rises above the drain so too does the pressure of the liquid passing through it.

Resistors develop a voltage in much the same way.  Imagine a current source, in our case a battery, that has a finite amount of electrons collected at the negative terminal (aka the anode).  This can be thought of as our pool with the drain closed, where the collection of electrons are the water.  We call our group of electrons ”charge” and if the circuit is closed they will try to equalize the charge in the battery by moving through the circuit. 

There is a bunch of potential energy that can be released by providing a path for the energy to take.  In the case of the pool, the potential energy can be realized by opening the drain.  In the case of the battery, the potential can be released by completing the circuit between the negative terminal and the positive terminal (aka the cathode).  The size of the drain will determine how fast the water drains out of the pool; a one meter hole in the side of the pool will drain it extremely quickly while a millimeter hole might take several hours or days.  A resistor is inversely analogous to the size of pipe being used; a "small" resistor will allow a lot of electrons to flow from the anode of the battery to the cathode, while a "large" resistor will only let a 'trickle' of electrons through. The voltage developed over our resistor will be given by the voltage of the battery and the current, or number of electrons per second, passing through it will be given by the voltage across it divided by its resistance.

Releasing all of the water in our pool at once on our garden bed might cause problems for the flowers and using a very small resistor to pull charge out of a battery can be comparatively problematic.  When the resistance is extremely low, for instance if the only resistance is that of a copper wire, electrons move very quickly across the resistor.  As electrons move through the resistor they generate heat via friction.  If there is enough current passing through the material it will heat up eventually to the point of melting or catching fire. This is actually how fuses work: a piece of wire is chosen such that at the rated current the wire burns up and the circuit is interrupted. It is worth noting that with enough current humans can become fuses too and it is thus not advised to hold metal objects overhead in a lightning storm.

To sum up the basics: Resistors provide a method to reduce the number of electrons that can flow through a given circuit.  When we want all of the electrons flowing, we use low resistance materials like copper or gold.  When we do not want electrons to flow we use things with extremely high resistance like rubber to stop the flow or provide insulation.  We don't always want all of the electrons to flow, or to stop them completely for that matter.  That's why resistors come in all shapes and sizes.  In further posts we will go into some detail about applications of resistor-only networks and regarding RLC networks, BJTs and MOSFETs we will see some advanced use of resistors.
